Neilj/improved delegation doc 2 (#4832)
matrix-org/synapse: docs/federate.md

``homeserver.yaml``) defines how resources (users, rooms, etc.) will be
identified (eg: ``@user:example.com``, ``#room:example.com``). By
default, it is also the domain that other servers will use to
try to reach your server (via port 8448). This is easy to set
up and will work provided you set the ``server_name`` to match your
machine's public DNS hostname, and provide Synapse with a TLS certificate
which is valid for your ``server_name``.

Once you have completed the steps necessary to federate, you should be able to 
join a room via federation. (A good place to start is ``#synapse:matrix.org``
- a room for Synapse admins.)

## Delegation

For a more flexible configuration, you can have ``server_name``
resources (eg: ``@user:example.com``) served by a different host and
port (eg: ``synapse.example.com:443``). There are two ways to do this:

- adding a ``/.well-known/matrix/server`` URL served on ``https://example.com``.
- adding a DNS ``SRV`` record in the DNS zone of domain
  ``example.com``.

Without configuring delegation, the matrix federation will
expect to find your server via ``example.com:8448``. The

> following methods allow you retain a ```server_name``` of ```example.com`` 

Reviewer: markdown technically uses single-backticks for inline preformatted text, though you can often get away with double-backticks. Triple-backticks are for preformated *blocks*, and a mix of them really messes things up.

```suggestion
following methods allow you retain a `server_name` of `example.com`
```

> while providing a different server and port for ``*:example.com`` resources 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
so that your user IDs, room aliases, etc continue to look like `*:example.com` whilst having your federation traffic routed to a different server. 
```

such user ids and room aliases.

### .well-known delegation

To use this method, you need to be able to alter the
``server_name`` 's https server to serve the ``/.well-known/matrix/server``

> URL. Having an active server (with a valid ``SSL`` certificate) serving your

Reviewer: SSL doesn't need preformatting, and we should be consistent about TLS vs SSL. TLS is more correct.

```suggestion
URL. Having an active server (with a valid TLS certificate) serving your
```

``server_name`` domain is out of the scope of this documentation.

The URL ``https://<server_name>/.well-known/matrix/server`` should
return a JSON structure containing the key ``m.server`` like so:

    {
	    "m.server": "<synapse.server.name>[:<yourport>]"
    }

In our example, this would mean that URL ``https://example.com/.well-known/matrix/server``
should return:

    {
	    "m.server": "synapse.example.com:443"
    }

Note, specifying a port is optional. If a port is not specified an SRV lookup

> is perfomed, which may in turn specify a port. If the target of the

Reviewer: SRV records always specify a port.

```suggestion
is performed, as described below. If the target of the
```

delegation does not have an SRV record, then the port defaults to 8448.

Most installations will not need to configure .well-known. However, it can be
useful in cases where the admin is hosting on behalf of someone else and
therefore cannot gain access to the necessary certificate. With .well-known,

> federation servers will check for a valid SSL certificate on the same delegated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
federation servers will check for a valid TLS certificate for the delegated
```

hostname (in our example: ``synapse.example.com``).

.well-known support first appeared in Synapse v0.99.0. To federate with older
servers you may need to additionally configure SRV delegation. Alternatively,
encourage the server admin in question to upgrade :).

### DNS SRV delegation

To use this delegation method, you need to have write access to your
``server_name`` 's domain zone DNS records (in our example it would be
``example.com`` DNS zone).

This method requires the target server to provide a

> valid SSL certificate identifying it as the original ``server_name``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
valid TLS certificate for the original ``server_name``.
```

(delete "domain zone")

Setting up Federation
=====================

Federation is the process by which users on different servers can participate
in the same room. For this to work, those other servers must be able to contact
yours to send messages.

The ``server_name`` configured in the Synapse configuration file (often

> ``homeserver.yaml``) defines how resources (users, rooms,...) will be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``homeserver.yaml``) defines how resources (users, rooms, etc.) will be
```

> identified (ie: ``@user:example.com``, ``#room:example.com``). By

Reviewer: ```suggestion
identified (eg: ``@user:example.com``, ``#room:example.com``). By
```

default, it is also the domain that other servers will use to

> try to reach your server via port 8448. This is easy to set

Reviewer: ```suggestion
try to reach your server (via port 8448). This is easy to set
```

up and will work provided you set the ``server_name`` to match your
machine's public DNS hostname, and provide Synapse with a TLS certificate
which is valid for your ``server_name``.

> Once you have completed the steps necessary to federate, you should be able to

Reviewer: given that you should be able to connect with a client before this, it feels slightly confusing to reiterate this - I am left wondering if I should now be using a different method to connect. In short, I'd be inclined to miss out the "you should be able to connect" phrase and go straight for "you should be able to join rooms via federation".

Author: Agreed

>  [connect to your server with a client](../README.rst#registering-a-new-user-from-a-client).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[connect to your server with a client](../README.rst#registering-a-new-user-from-a-client),
```

and then join a room via federation. (A good place to start is ``#synapse:matrix.org``

>  - a room for Synapse admins.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- a room for Synapse admins.)
```

## Delegation

For a more flexible configuration, you can have ``server_name``

> resources (ie: ``@user:example.com``) served by a different host and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
resources (eg: ``@user:example.com``) served by a different host and
```

> port (ie: ``synapse.example.com:443``). There are two ways to do this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
port (eg: ``synapse.example.com:443``). There are two ways to do this:
```

- adding a ``/.well-known/matrix/server`` URL served on ``https://example.com``.
- adding a DNS ``SRV`` record in the DNS zone of domain
  ``example.com``.

> 

Reviewer: I think it might be worth reiterating somewhere around here that in both cases, `server_name` should be kept as `example.com`, so that user ids, room aliases, etc continue to look like `*:example.com`.

Author: Done

For both methods let's say you want to run your server at
``synapse.example.com`` on port ``443`` (instead of ``8448``), but you
want to have your Matrix user-ids look like ``@user:example.com``.

Without configuring delegation, the matrix federation will

> expect to find your resources via ``example.com:8448``. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
expect to find your server via ``example.com:8448``. The
```

following methods allow you to provide a different server and port for
``*:example.com`` resources.

### .well-known delegation

To use this method, you need to be able to alter the
``server_name`` 's https server to serve the ``/.well-known/matrix/server``
URL. Having an active server (with a valid ``SSL`` certificate) serving your
``server_name`` domain is out of the scope of this documentation.

The URL ``https://<server_name>/.well-known/matrix/server`` should
return a JSON structure containing the key ``m.server`` like so:

    {

> 	    "m.server": "<synapse.server.name>:<yourport>"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	    "m.server": "<synapse.server.name>[:<yourport>]"
```

    }

In our example, this would mean that URL ``https://example.com/.well-known/matrix/server``
should return:

    {
	    "m.server": "synapse.example.com:443"
    }

> Note, specifying a port is optional and will default to 443.

Reviewer: no, it won't.

If you don't specify a port, it will go on to do a SRV lookup, which may in turn specify a port. If there is no SRV record on the target of the delegation, it will default to port 8448.

Author: Reworded

> Most installations will not need to configure .well-known. However it can  be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most installations will not need to configure .well-known. However, it can be
```

useful in cases where the admin is hosting on behalf of someone else and
therefore cannot gain access to the necessary certificate. With .well-known,

> federation servers will contact the given hostname's IP and

Reviewer: "will contact the given hostname's IP and" adds nothing here; delete.

Author: done

will check for a valid SSL certificate on the same delegated hostname (in our
example: ``synapse.example.com``).

> .well-known support first appeared in Synapse v0.99.0, to federate with older

Reviewer: comma tax!
```suggestion
.well-known support first appeared in Synapse v0.99.0. To federate with older
```

servers you may need to additionally configure SRV delegation. Alternatively,

> encourage the server admin in question to upgrade :)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
encourage the server admin in question to upgrade :).
```

### DNS SRV delegation

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> To use this method, you need to have write access to your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use this delegation method, you need to have write access to your
```

``server_name`` 's domain zone DNS records (in our example it would be
``example.com`` DNS zone).

This method requires the target server to provide a
valid SSL certificate identifying it as the original ``server_name``

> domain zone. So the delegate domain name is only used to resolve a possible

Reviewer: This ("so the delegate domain...") isn't really true: SRV adds a whole bunch of functionality including failover and round-robin. I don't think the sentence adds anything anyway. Suggest deleting.

Author: done

> different IP/Port combination to find your server. You must use the other

Reviewer: I'm not sure this sentence adds much either, but if you think it's worth keeping, suggest rewording as "You should use [.well-known delegation][link] if this isn't what you want.".

Author: Removed

> delegation method if this isn't what you want. (for more details on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
delegation method if this isn't what you want. (For more details on the
```

> rationale [see here](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/blob/master/proposals/1711-x509-for-federation.md#interaction-with-srv-records))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rationale [see here](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/blob/master/proposals/1711-x509-for-federation.md#interaction-with-srv-records).)
```

You need to add a SRV record in your ``server_name`` 's DNS zone with
this format:

     _matrix._tcp.<yourdomain.com> <ttl> IN SRV <priority> <weight> <port> <synapse.server.name>

In our example, we would need to add this SRV record in the
``example.com`` DNS zone:

     _matrix._tcp.example.com. 3600 IN SRV 10 5 443 synapse.example.com.

Once done and set up, you can check the DNS record with ``dig -t srv

> _matrix._tcp.<server_name>``, in our example, we would expect this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_matrix._tcp.<server_name>``. In our example, we would expect this:
```

    $ dig -t srv _matrix._tcp.example.com
    _matrix._tcp.example.com. 3600    IN      SRV     10 0 443 synapse.example.com.

> Note that the server host name cannot be an alias (CNAME record): it has to point

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the target of a SRV record cannot be an alias (CNAME record): it has to point
```

directly to the server hosting the synapse instance.

## Troubleshooting

You can use the [federation tester](
<https://matrix.org/federationtester>) to check if your homeserver is

> configured correctly. Alternatively try the [raw API url used by the federation tester](https://matrix.org/federationtester/api/report?server_name=DOMAIN).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
configured correctly. Alternatively try the [JSON API used by the federation tester](https://matrix.org/federationtester/api/report?server_name=DOMAIN).
```

Note that you'll have to modify this URL to replace ``DOMAIN`` with your

> ``server_name``. Hitting the URL directly provides extra detail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``server_name``. Hitting the API directly provides extra detail.
```

> For more details the see the [Server to Server Spec](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/server_server/r0.1.1.html#resolving-server-names).

Reviewer: this is a bit of a funny place for this.

Author: Removed

Setting up Federation
=====================

Federation is the process by which users on different servers can participate
in the same room. For this to work, those other servers must be able to contact
yours to send messages.

The ``server_name`` configured in the Synapse configuration file (often
``homeserver.yaml``) defines how resources (users, rooms,...) will be
identified (ie: ``@user:example.com``, ``#room:example.com``). By
default, it is also the default domain that other servers will use to
try to reach your server via port 8448. This is easy to set
up and will work provided you set the ``server_name`` to match your
machine's public DNS hostname, and provide Synapse with a TLS certificate
which is valid for your ``server_name``.

> For a more flexible configuration, you can have ``server_name``

Reviewer: should all of this be under a "Delegation" section?

Author: Yes

resources (ie: ``@user:example.com``) served by a different host and

> port (ie: ``synapse.example.com:443``). There are 2 ways to do this:

Reviewer 2: Maybe mention somewhere around here that both ways are described more in-depth in dedicated sections below? This section ending with "If all goes well, you should be able to connect to your server with a client and then join a room via federation" would make me think that I should have delegation working by reaching this point of the documentation.

Author: I reworded

- adding a DNS ``SRV`` record in the DNS zone of domain
  ``example.com``. Beware that this method has some limitations as it
  will still require your delegated server to use a SSL certificate
  identifying it as the original ``server_name`` domain name. Meaning
  that the provided ``synapse.example.com`` delegate domain name will
  only be used to get a possibly different IP/port, but won't be used
  for SSL domain name verification.

- adding a ``/.well-known/matrix/server`` URL served on ``https://example.com``

> For both methods let's say you want to run your server at

Reviewer: these three paragraphs are probably redundant?

Author: I see it as more of an intro - I've removed quite a lot as per other comments and added a Delegation section. I think it is in better shape. I'll push so you can see.

Reviewer: I still think this paragraph is just duplicating the paragraph above "For a more flexible configuration ...".

``synapse.example.com`` on port ``443`` (instead of ``8448``), but you
want to have your Matrix user-ids look like ``@user:example.com``.

Without configuring delegation, the matrix federation will
expect to find your resources via ``example.com:8448``. The
following methods allow you to provide a different server and port for
``*:example.com`` resources.

If all goes well, you should be able to [connect to your server with a client](../README.rst#registering-a-new-user-from-a-client).
and then join a room via federation. (A good place to start is ``#synapse:matrix.org`` - a room for 
Synapse admins.)

> DNS SRV delegation

Reviewer: again, we should list .well-known before SRV

------------------

To use this method, you need to have write access to your
``server_name`` 's domain zone DNS records (in our example it would be
``example.com`` DNS zone).

> This method additionally requires your delegate server to provide a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This method requires the target server to provide a
```

valid SSL certificate identifying it as the original ``server_name``
domain zone. So the delegate domain name is only used to resolve a possible 
different IP/Port combination to find your server. You must use the other 

> delegation method is this isn't what you want. (for more details on the 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
delegation method if this isn't what you want. (for more details on the 
```

Reviewer: Needs a capital F too

> rationale [see here](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/blob/master/proposals/1711-x509-for-federation.md#interaction-with-srv-records>))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
rationale [see here](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/blob/master/proposals/1711-x509-for-federation.md#interaction-with-srv-records))
```

Reviewer: needs a `.` too

You need to add a SRV record in your ``server_name`` 's DNS zone with
this format::

>      _matrix._tcp.<yourdomain.com> <ttl> IN SRV 10 0 <port> <synapse.server.name>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     _matrix._tcp.<yourdomain.com> <ttl> IN SRV <priority> <weight> <port> <synapse.server.name>
```

In our example, we would need to add this SRV record in the
``example.com`` DNS zone::

>      _matrix._tcp.example.com. 3600 IN SRV 10 0 443 synapse.example.com.

Reviewer: I would not recommend using 0 as a weight.
```suggestion
     _matrix._tcp.example.com. 3600 IN SRV 10 5 443 synapse.example.com.
```

Once done and set up, you can check the DNS record with ``dig -t srv
_matrix._tcp.<server_name>``, in our example, we would expect this::

    $ dig -t srv _matrix._tcp.example.com
    _matrix._tcp.example.com. 3600    IN      SRV     10 0 443 synapse.example.com.

Note that the server host name cannot be an alias (CNAME record): it has to point
directly to the server hosting the synapse instance.

.well-known delegation
----------------------

To use this method, you need to be able to alter the
``server_name`` 's https server to serve the ``/.well-known/matrix/server`` 
URL. Having an active server (with a valid ``SSL`` certificate) serving your 
``server_name`` domain is out of the scope of this documentation.

The URL ``https://<server_name>/.well-known/matrix/server`` should
return a JSON structure containing the key ``m.server`` like so::

    {

> 	    "m.server": "<synapse.server.name>:<yourport>"

Reviewer: I'd really like us to make clear that the port is optional here, somehow.

Author: added a note calling it out

    }

In our example, this would mean that URL ``https://example.com/.well-known/matrix/server``
should return::

    {
	    "m.server": "synapse.example.com:443"
    }

> This delegation method allows a full delegation contrary to the DNS SRV

Reviewer: I think this paragraph needs a rethink, but I'm not quite sure what it should look like.

Author: What are your concerns?

Author: Can you explain your concerns?

Author: Addressed our of band and changes committed - wanted to ensure that the methods were considered 'different' rather than one being preferable to another.

method: federation servers will contact the given hostname's IP and
will check for a valid SSL certificate on the same delegated hostname (in our
example: ``synapse.example.com``).

> Setting your server_name

Reviewer: We're going for a model where you get your server working first and then enable federation, so this section doesn't seem very useful.

Author: Have moved it to INSTALL.md

Author: have moved to INSTALL

------------------------

Note that you can NOT change the ``server_name`` after the database
is first created.  So choose your ``server_name`` with care.

> You can then configure your homeserver to use ``<yourdomain.com>`` as the domain in

Reviewer: "then" is confusing here.

its user-ids, by setting ``server_name`` on the command line::

    python -m synapse.app.homeserver \
        --server-name <yourdomain.com> \
        --config-path homeserver.yaml \
        --generate-config
    python -m synapse.app.homeserver --config-path homeserver.yaml

If you've already generated the config file, you need to edit the ``server_name``
in your configuration file (often ``homeserver.yaml`` file). If you have 
already started Synapse and a database has been created, you will need to 
recreate the database.

Troubleshooting
---------------

You can use the [federation tester](
<https://matrix.org/federationtester>) to check if your homeserver is

> configured correctly. Or the [raw API url used by the federation tester](https://matrix.org/federationtester/api/report?server_name=DOMAIN)

Reviewer: you can't start a sentence with "Or", either...

> , note that you'll have to modify this URL to replace ``DOMAIN`` with your

Reviewer: comma tax

``server_name``. Hitting the URL directly provides extra detail.

> For more details the see the [Server to Server Spec](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/server_server/r0.1.1.html#resolving-server-names>).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more details the see the [Server to Server Spec](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/server_server/r0.1.1.html#resolving-server-names).
```

Without configuring delegation, the matrix federation will
expect to find your server via ``example.com:8448``. The
following methods allow you retain a `server_name` of `example.com`

> so that your user IDs, room aliases, etc continue to look like `*:example.com`, whilst having your federation traffic routed to a different server. 

Reviewer: please wrap

> such user ids and room aliases.

Reviewer: orphaned sentence

``example.com`` DNS zone).

This method requires the target server to provide a
valid TLS certificate for the original ``server_name``.

> domain zone. 

Reviewer: orphaned
